manual.md, before:

# Manual

*almanakk-cli* is a command-line program for calculation of solar ephemeris (sunrise and sunset for a given geographical location and date), celestial phases (phases of the moon) and calendar events derived from celestial phase events. 

Almanakk (Norwegian for almanac) is an astronomical calendar, containing ephemeris of celestial objects.

*almanakk-cli* is a client program for the *almanakk-lib* library (currently, the library is not in a public repo). 

# Ephemeris

Ephemeris of astronomical bodies 

* sunset and sunrise

## signature

`almanakk ephemeris <lat> <lon> [timezone]`

## Input Parameters

| Parameter | Description                                              |
| :---      | :---                                                     |
| lat       | Latitude of the geographical location (decimal degrees)  |
| lon       | Longitude of the geographical location (decimal degrees) |
| timezone  | Timezone (optional) for output time (integer)            |
|           |                                                          |

The current date (and timezone if not provided) is determined from the system clock. 

## Ephemeris Data Product

| Parameter | Description                                 |
| :---      | :---                                        |
| sunrise   | Time of sunrise, in unit of hour and minute |
| sunset    | Time of sunset, in unit of hour and minute  |
| Δ rise    | Daily change in sunrise time, in seconds.   |
| Δ set     | Daily change in sunset time, in seconds.    |

`Δ rise` is < 0 between winter and summer solstice (approximately), whereas `Δ set` is vice versa.


# Phase

## signature

`almanakk phase [timezone]`

## Input Parameters

| Parameter | Description                                              |
| :---      | :---                                                     |
| timezone  | Timezone (optional) for output time (integer)            |
|           |                                                          |

## Celestial Phase Data Product

### Celestial Phase 

The current phase of the moon. The phases are the time durations between each 4 phase events. From the start of the lunar cycle to the end, they are as follows: 
Waxing crescent, Waxing gibbous, Waning gibbous, Waning crescent.

### Celestial Phase Events

Date and time of next phase event. Output minutes are rounded to the nearest 5.
Currently, only the phases of the Moon are calculated. But, phases of other celestial bodies such as planets may be added in the future.
The phase cycle contains 4 events:  New, first quarter, full and last quarter. `almanakk-cli` displays the lunar phase events, ordered by date of occurrence. 

# Calendar

## Signature

`almanakk calendar`

## Calendar Data Product

### Christian Holidays

A list of holidays in the Christian Liturgical Year. By default, upcoming holidays from current day to the end of the current year, are shown. 


# Examples

Sunrise and sunset for London, UK (lat. 51.5 and lon. 0.1)

    almanakk-cli ephemeris 51.5 0.1

    Observer data
    Time zone             CEST                
    Location              lat 51.5 lon 0.1    

    Solar celestial rising and setting
    Sunrise               6h30m               
    Sunset                21h20m              
    Δ rise                -111.5s             
    Δ set                 98s 

Sunrise and sunset for Oslo, Norway (lat 59.9 and lon. 10.75)

    ./almanakk-cli ephemeris 59.9 10.75

    Observer data
    Date                  2024-5-1            
    Time zone             CEST                
    Location              lat 59.9 lon 10.75  

    Solar celestial rising and setting
    Sunrise               5h10m               
    Sunset                21h15m              
    Δ rise                -161.5s             
    Δ set                 148s  

Sunrise and sunset for  Lima, Peru (lat -12.05 and lon -77.03), with specified time zone. 

    almanakk-cli ephemeris -12.05 -77.03 -5
        
    Observer data
    Date                  2024-5-1            
    Time zone             -0500               
    Location              lat -12.05 lon -77.0

    Solar celestial rising and setting
    Sunrise               6h15m               
    Sunset                17h55m              
    Δ rise                9s                  
    Δ set                 -22.5s   

Current celestial phase

    almanakk-cli phase

    Celestial phase data
    Lunar phase           Waning Gibbous      

    Next celestial phase events
    2024-5-1 13h25m       Moon                  Last quarter        
    2024-5-8 5h20m        Moon                  New                 
    2024-5-15 13h45m      Moon                  First quarter       
    2024-5-23 15h50m      Moon                  Full

Christian calendar (upcoming calendar events at 2024-05-01)

    almanakk calendar

    Christian holidays

    Ascension of Jesus    2024-05-09          
    Pentecost             2024-05-19          
    Trinity Sunday        2024-05-26          

# Reference

Builds for aarch64-osx are available from [rtrollebo.github.io/documentation](https://rtrollebo.github.io/documentation/)

Commit message:

Add equinox to the almanakk calendar
* Apply the equinox function exposed from almanakk-lib version,
and calculate equinox for the current year. Convert the equinox date time to an calendar entry.
Calculation of solstice is almost complete in almanakk-lib, and will be added in subsequent versions.
* Add classes and instances for converting Day and UTCTime into calendar entries.
* Adjust width of string-entry in calendar list
* Update documentation and manual.
* package: adjust version numbering to 3-level instead of 4-levels.

manual.md, after:

# Manual

*almanakk-cli* is a command-line program for calculation of solar ephemeris (sunrise and sunset for a given geographical location and date), celestial phases (phases of the moon) and calendar events derived from celestial phase events. 

Almanakk (Norwegian for almanac) is an astronomical calendar, containing ephemeris of celestial objects.

*almanakk-cli* is a client program for the *almanakk-lib* library (currently, the library is not in a public repo). 

# Ephemeris

Ephemeris of astronomical bodies 

* sunset and sunrise

## signature

`almanakk ephemeris <lat> <lon> [timezone]`

## Input Parameters

| Parameter | Description                                              |
| :---      | :---                                                     |
| lat       | Latitude of the geographical location (decimal degrees)  |
| lon       | Longitude of the geographical location (decimal degrees) |
| timezone  | Timezone (optional) for output time (integer)            |
|           |                                                          |

The current date (and timezone if not provided) is determined from the system clock. 

## Ephemeris Data Product

| Parameter | Description                                 |
| :---      | :---                                        |
| sunrise   | Time of sunrise, in unit of hour and minute |
| sunset    | Time of sunset, in unit of hour and minute  |
| Δ rise    | Daily change in sunrise time, in seconds.   |
| Δ set     | Daily change in sunset time, in seconds.    |

`Δ rise` is < 0 between winter and summer solstice (approximately), whereas `Δ set` is vice versa.


# Phase

## signature

`almanakk phase [timezone]`

## Input Parameters

| Parameter | Description                                              |
| :---      | :---                                                     |
| timezone  | Timezone (optional) for output time (integer)            |
|           |                                                          |

## Celestial Phase Data Product

### Celestial Phase 

The current phase of the moon. The phases are the time durations between each 4 phase events. From the start of the lunar cycle to the end, they are as follows: 
Waxing crescent, Waxing gibbous, Waning gibbous, Waning crescent.

### Celestial Phase Events

Date and time of next phase event. Output minutes are rounded to the nearest 5.
Currently, only the phases of the Moon are calculated. But, phases of other celestial bodies such as planets may be added in the future.
The phase cycle contains 4 events:  New, first quarter, full and last quarter. `almanakk-cli` displays the lunar phase events, ordered by date of occurrence. 

# Calendar

## Signature

`almanakk calendar`

## Calendar Data Product

### Equinox

Date and time of the equinoxes:

* Northward equinox, or the *March equinox* (Spring equinox in the northern hepmispher, autumn equinox in the southern hemisphere)
* Southward equinox, or the *September equinox*.

### Christian Holidays

A list of holidays in the Christian Liturgical Year. By default, upcoming holidays from current day to the end of the current year, are shown. 


# Examples

Sunrise and sunset for London, UK (lat. 51.5 and lon. 0.1)

    almanakk-cli ephemeris 51.5 0.1

    Observer data
    Time zone             CEST                
    Location              lat 51.5 lon 0.1    

    Solar celestial rising and setting
    Sunrise               6h30m               
    Sunset                21h20m              
    Δ rise                -111.5s             
    Δ set                 98s 

Sunrise and sunset for Oslo, Norway (lat 59.9 and lon. 10.75)

    ./almanakk-cli ephemeris 59.9 10.75

    Observer data
    Date                  2024-5-1            
    Time zone             CEST                
    Location              lat 59.9 lon 10.75  

    Solar celestial rising and setting
    Sunrise               5h10m               
    Sunset                21h15m              
    Δ rise                -161.5s             
    Δ set                 148s  

Sunrise and sunset for  Lima, Peru (lat -12.05 and lon -77.03), with specified time zone. 

    almanakk-cli ephemeris -12.05 -77.03 -5
        
    Observer data
    Date                  2024-5-1            
    Time zone             -0500               
    Location              lat -12.05 lon -77.0

    Solar celestial rising and setting
    Sunrise               6h15m               
    Sunset                17h55m              
    Δ rise                9s                  
    Δ set                 -22.5s   

Current celestial phase

    almanakk-cli phase

    Celestial phase data
    Lunar phase           Waning Gibbous      

    Next celestial phase events
    2024-5-1 13h25m       Moon                  Last quarter        
    2024-5-8 5h20m        Moon                  New                 
    2024-5-15 13h45m      Moon                  First quarter       
    2024-5-23 15h50m      Moon                  Full

Christian calendar (upcoming calendar events at 2024-05-14)

    almanakk calendar

    Christian holidays and astronomical events

    Pentecost                   2024-05-19                
    Trinity Sunday              2024-05-26                
    Equinox southward 14h40m    2024-09-22     

# Reference

Builds for aarch64-osx are available from [rtrollebo.github.io/documentation](https://rtrollebo.github.io/documentation/)
